Add search by candidate name or reference (#293)
DFE-Digital/bat-design-history: app/posts/manage-teacher-training-applications/2020-12-18-search-by-candidate-name-or-reference.md

---
title: Search by candidate name or reference
description: Let users search the applications list by candidate name or reference
date: 2020-12-18
---

> We introduced a search to allow users to search the applications list by candidate name or number.

Reviewer: We have had the ability to search by name for a long time.

This work is more adding in the ability to search by reference number and improving the interaction while we’re at it.

Author: Okay, I've updated to this:

>We updated the search to allow users to find applications by candidate number in addition to candidate name.

This change included:

> - creating a search field above the applications list to accept terms that are compared to a candidate’s full name or application reference

Reviewer: Change to ‘Moving the search form’ from ‘Creating’

Author: Done

---
title: Search by candidate name or reference
description: Let users search the applications list by candidate name or reference
date: 2020-12-18
---

We updated the search to allow users to find applications by reference in addition to candidate name.

> The search works independently from the filters, allowing users to filter or search in whatever way suits their needs.

Reviewer: How does splitting out ‘allow users to filter or search in whatever way suits their needs’ in comparison to the previous design?

Author: In the previous design, the search was incorporated into the filters. If a user cleared all filters they also cleared the search. This may or may not be desirable.

This whole sentence is a duplicate of one in the how it works section, so I have removed it in favour of the latter sentence.

This change included:

> - moving the search form to above the applications list to accept terms that are compared to a candidate’s full name or reference

Reviewer: Why did we do this?

> - moving the search form to above the applications list to accept terms that are compared to a candidate’s full name or reference

Author: Suggestion accepted

> - removing the candidate name search from the filters side bar

Reviewer: Why did we do that?

Reviewer: Also this is really a dupe of the first bullet.

Author: De-duped.

> - adding the reference number to each application listing

Reviewer: Why?

> - retaining the search term in the search field

Reviewer: Why?

> - retaining the search term in the search field

Author: Suggestion accepted

> - providing a way to clear the search term once a search has been carried out, allowing users to get back to the original list state

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- providing a way to clear the search term once a search has been carried out, which is better than leaving users to submit an empty search box
```

Author: Fixed the content

> - updating the text and position of the clear filter action, which also resolved one of the issues highlighted in the recent accessibility review

Reviewer: Why did we do that? What accessibility issue?

Author: DAC found the simple 'Clear' link name was ambiguous in their accessibility review of the service. Given we added 'Clear search' it made sense to update the filter equivalent in this piece of work.

> Other considerations included:

Reviewer: Maybe put all this in a separate section at the end.

Author: Done

- highlighting the search term in the applications that match
- introducing a sorting mechanism (eg by relevance, alphabetical ascending/descending, etc) to allow users to sort the list beyond the default priority

> Neither considerations were implemented in this iteration as we could not establish a need for them.

Author: Suggestion accepted

## Why we are doing this

> Providers have highlighted that when a candidate contacts them, they sometimes refer to their reference number. Being able to search by reference number as well as the candidate's name helps providers search more easily and accurately.

Reviewer: I think this should be the first sentence of the post. WHY should come first.

Reviewer: What does the word ‘highlight’ mean? Did they say they wanted this in research? Is it something they already do with UCAS?

Why does the reference help specifically in comparison to searching by name which we currently allow?

Author: >What does the word ‘highlight’ mean?

These are the words from the researchers. Happy to reframe if confusing.

>Why does the reference help specifically in comparison to searching by name which we currently allow?

The second sentence addresses this. Searching by reference is more accurate compared to searching by name since many candidates can have the same name, but a single candidate has a single reference number. I'll update it.

## How it works

> When a user carries out a search or filters the applications list, a list of applications matching the search or filters is returned. If no applications are found, users are presented with an empty state.

Reviewer: Replace ‘an empty state’ with what we specifically show

Author: This is at the bottom of the how it works section so I've removed the sentence.

> When a user carries out a search or filters the applications list, a list of applications matching the search or filters is returned. If no applications are found, users are presented with an empty state.

Author: Suggestion accepted

> Searching and filtering are independent of one another. This means, if someone first searches for an application and then applies one or more filters, the filters act upon the sub-set of applications returned by the initial search. Similarly, if someone first filters the applications list, a subsequent search is across the applications in the filtered list, not the full list.

Author: Suggestion accepted

The search term is retained in the search field. Once a search has been carried out, a ‘Clear search’ link is provided below the search field, allowing users to reset the search back to the initial state. The initial state may be a full applications list or a sub-set if the list has previously been filtered.

> Navigating to an application, or away from the applications list page clears the search term, but not the filters. The search is considered to be complete. Filters remain selected to support the user’s workflow.

Reviewer: In what way does it support the user's workflow? Alternatively kill that sentence.

Author: Sentence killed

> Navigating to an application, or away from the applications list page clears the search term, but not the filters. The search is considered to be complete. Filters remain selected to support the user’s workflow.

Author: Suggestion accepted

> If a single application is found via the search or filters or a combination of both, the user is presented with applications list containing the single application, not automatically taken to the detail of the application. This allows users to orientate themselves or correct mistakes before making a decision to view the application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If one application is found when searching or filtering, it’s shown in the application list. The user is not automatically taken to the application page. This allows users to orientate themselves or correct mistakes before making a decision to view the application.
```

> If a single application is found via the search or filters or a combination of both, the user is presented with applications list containing the single application, not automatically taken to the detail of the application. This allows users to orientate themselves or correct mistakes before making a decision to view the application.

Author: Suggestion accepted

> If no applications are found, we show a message depending on the search and filter terms:

Reviewer: A dupe of the above empty state sentence.
